Metalk8s predefined Alert rules and Alert Grouping
==================================================

Context
-------

As part of Metalk8s, we would like to provide the Administrator with built-in
rules expressions that can be used to fire alert and send notifications when
one of the High Level entities of the system is degraded or impacted by the
degradation of a Low Level component.

As an example, we would like to notify the administrator when the MetalK8s log
service is degraded because of some specific observed symptoms:

* not all replicas are scheduled
* one of the persistent volumes claimed by one log service replica is getting
  full.
* Ingestion rate is near zero

In this specific example, the goal is to invite the administrator to perform
manual tasks to avoid having a Log Service interruption in the near future.

When receiving such High Level entity alerts, we would like the system to guide
the administrator to find and understand the root cause of the issue as well as
the path to resolve it. Accessing the list of observed low level symptoms will
help the administrator investigation.

Having the High Level Entity Alerts also helps the administrator to have a
better understanding of what part/layer/component of the System is currently
impacted (without having to build a mental model to guess the impact of any
existing alert in the System)

.. image:: img/metalk8s-overview.jpg

As part of MetalK8s we are already deploying a bunch of atomic alerts but we
donâ€™t yet have the HighLevel entity Alerts that we could use to build the
above dashboard. Being able to define the impact of one atomic alert is a way
to build those High Level Entity Alerts:

It is impossible to modelize all possible causes through this kind of impacting
tree. However, when an alert is received, the system shall suggest other alerts
that may be linked to it, using matching labels.

Also, when accessing the Node or the Volume page / alert tab, the administrator
should be able to vizualise all the fired alerts that are described under Nodes
or Volumes entities.

Severity Classification
-----------------------

* Critical Alert = Red = Service Offline or At Risk, requires immediate
  intervention
* Warning Alert = Yellow = Service Degraded, requires planned (within 1 week)
  intervention
* No Active Alert = Green = Service Healthy

Notifications are either a mail, slack message or whatever routing supported by
AlertManager or a decorated icon in the UI.

Vocabulary
----------

Atomic alert: An Alert which is based on existing metrics in Prometheus

High Level Alert / Logical Alert: An Alert which is based on other alerts

Data Model
----------

We consider that Nodes and Volumes don't impact the Platform directly. As such
they are not belonging to Platform.

`Volumes`_

`Nodes`_

* `System Partitions`_

`Platform`_

* `Platform Services`_

    * `Core`_

    * `Observability`_

    * `Access`_

* `Network`_


Parent Alert Severity = Max Children Alert Severity

Platform
********

.. _PlatformAtRisk:

.. csv-table:: _PlatformAtRisk
   :align: left
   :widths: 50,200

   "Severity", "Critical"
   "Summary", "The Platform is at risk"
   "Parent", "*none*"

.. csv-table::
   :header: "Sub Alert", "Severity", "Filter"
   :widths: 200,50,250

   `PlatformServicesAtRisk`_ ,Critical

.. _PlatformDegraded:

.. csv-table:: PlatformDegraded
   :align: left
   :widths: 50,200

   "Severity", "Warning"
   "Summary", "The Platform is degraded"
   "Parent", "*none*"

.. csv-table::
   :header: "Sub Alert", "Severity", "Filter"
   :widths: 200,50,250

   `PlatformServicesDegraded`_ ,Warning
   `ControlPlaneNetworkDegraded`_,Warning
   `WorkloadPlaneNetworkDegraded`_,Warning


Nodes
*****

.. _NodeAtRisk:

.. csv-table:: NodeAtRisk
   :align: left
   :widths: 50,200

   "Severity", "Critical"
   "Summary", "Node <nodename> is at risk"
   "Parent", "none"

.. csv-table::
   :header: "Sub Alert", "Severity", "Filter"
   :widths: 200,50,250

   KubeletClientCertificateExpiration,Critical
   NodeRAIDDegraded,Critical
   SystemPartitionAtRisk,Critical

.. _NodeDegraded:

.. csv-table:: NodeDegraded
   :align: left
   :widths: 50,200

   "Severity", "Warning"
   "Summary", "Node <nodename> is degraded"
   "Parent", "none"

.. csv-table::
   :header: "Sub Alert", "Severity", "Filter"
   :widths: 200,50,250

   KubeNodeNotReady,Warning
   KubeNodeReadinessFlapping,Warning
   KubeNodeUnreachable,Warning
   KubeletClientCertificateExpiration,Warning
   KubeletClientCertificateRenewalErrors,Warning
   KubeletPlegDurationHigh,Warning
   KubeletPodStartUpLatencyHigh,Warning
   KubeletServerCertificateExpiration,Warning
   KubeletServerCertificateExpiration,Warning
   KubeletServerCertificateRenewalErrors,Warning
   KubeletTooManyPods,Warning
   NodeClockNotSynchronising,Warning
   NodeClockSkewDetected,Warning
   NodeRAIDDiskFailure,Warning
   NodeTextFileCollectorScrapeError,Warning
   SystemPartitionDegraded,Warning


Currently no atomic Alert is defined yet for the following

* System Unit (kubelet, containerd, salt-minion, ntp) would need to enrich
  node exporter
* RAM
* CPU

Also, we may want to have a NodesPool alert.

System Partitions
*****************

.. _SystemPartitionAtRisk:

.. csv-table:: SystemPartitionAtRisk
   :align: left
   :widths: 50,200

   "Severity", "Warning"
   "Summary", "The partition <mountpoint> on node <nodename> is at risk"
   "Parent", "`NodeAtRisk`_"

.. csv-table::
   :header: "Sub Alert", "Severity", "Filter"
   :widths: 200,50,250

   NodeFilesystemAlmostOutOfSpace,Critical,
   NodeFilesystemAlmostOutOfFiles,Critical,
   NodeFilesystemFilesFillingUp,Critical,
   NodeFilesystemSpaceFillingUp,Critical,


.. _SystemPartitionDegraded:

.. csv-table:: SystemPartitionDegraded
   :align: left
   :widths: 50,200

   "Severity", "Warning"
   "Summary", "The partition <mountpoint> on node <nodename> is degraded"
   "Parent", "`NodeDegraded`_"

.. csv-table::
   :header: "Sub Alert", "Severity", "Filter"
   :widths: 200,50,250

   NodeFilesystemAlmostOutOfSpace,Warning,
   NodeFilesystemAlmostOutOfFiles,Warning,
   NodeFilesystemFilesFillingUp,Warning,
   NodeFilesystemSpaceFillingUp,Warning,


Volumes
*******

.. _VolumeAtRisk:

.. csv-table:: VolumeAtRisk
   :align: left
   :widths: 50,200

   "Severity", "Critical"
   "Summary", "The volume <volumename> on node <nodename> is at risk"
   "Parent", "*multiple parents*"

.. csv-table::
   :header: "Sub Alert", "Severity", "Filter"
   :widths: 200,50,250

   KubePersistentVolumeErrors,Warning,
   KubePersistentVolumeFillingUp,Critical,


.. _VolumeDegraded:

.. csv-table:: VolumeDegraded
   :align: left
   :widths: 50,200

   "Severity", "Warning"
   "Summary", "The volume <volumename> on node <nodename> is degraded"
   "Parent", "*multiple parents*"

.. csv-table::
   :header: "Sub Alert", "Severity", "Filter"
   :widths: 200,50,250

   KubePersistentVolumeFillingUp,Warning,


Also, we may want to have a VolumesPool alert.


Platform Services
*****************

.. _PlatformServicesAtRisk:

.. csv-table:: PlatformServicesAtRisk
   :align: left
   :widths: 50,200

   "Severity", "Critical"
   "Summary", "The Platform services are at risk"
   "Parent", "`PlatformAtRisk`_"

.. csv-table::
   :header: "Sub Alert", "Severity", "Filter"
   :widths: 200,50,250

   `CoreServicesAtRisk`_,Critical,
   `ObservabilityServicesAtRisk`_,Critical,


.. _PlatformServicesDegraded:

.. csv-table:: PlatformServicesDegraded
   :align: left
   :widths: 50,200

   "Severity", "Warning"
   "Summary", "The Platform services are degraded"
   "Parent", "`PlatformDegraded`_"

.. csv-table::
   :header: "Sub Alert", "Severity", "Filter"
   :widths: 200,50,250

   `CoreServicesDegraded`_,Warning,
   `ObservabilityServicesDegraded`_,Warning,
   `AccessServicesDegraded`_,Warning,


Core
****

.. _CoreServicesAtRisk:

.. csv-table:: CoreServicesAtRisk
   :align: left
   :widths: 50,200

   "Severity", "Critical"
   "Summary", "The Core services are at risk"
   "Parent", "`PlatformServicesAtRisk`_"

.. csv-table::
   :header: "Sub Alert", "Severity", "Filter"
   :widths: 200,50,250

   `K8sMasterServicesAtRisk`_,Critical,


.. _CoreServicesDegraded:

.. csv-table:: CoreServicesDegraded
   :align: left
   :widths: 50,200

   "Severity", "Warning"
   "Summary", "The Core services are degraded"
   "Parent", "`PlatformServicesDegraded`_"

.. csv-table::
   :header: "Sub Alert", "Severity", "Filter"
   :widths: 200,50,250

   `K8sMasterServicesDegraded`_,Critical,
   `BootstrapServicesDegraded`_,Critical,

.. _K8sMasterServicesAtRisk:

.. csv-table:: K8sMasterServicesAtRisk
   :align: left
   :widths: 50,200

   "Severity", "Warning"
   "Summary", "The kubernetes master services are at risk"
   "Parent", "`CoreServicesAtRisk`_"

.. csv-table::
   :header: "Sub Alert", "Severity", "Filter"
   :widths: 200,50,250

   KubeAPIErrorBudgetBurn,Critical,
   etcdHighNumberOfFailedGRPCRequests,Critical,
   etcdGRPCRequestsSlow,Critical,
   etcdHighNumberOfFailedHTTPRequests,Critical,
   etcdInsufficientMembers,Critical,
   etcdMembersDown,Critical,
   etcdNoLeader,Critical,
   KubeStateMetricsListErrors,Critical,
   KubeStateMetricsWatchErrors,Critical,
   KubeAPIDown,Critical,
   KubeClientCertificateExpiration,Critical,
   KubeClientCertificateExpiration,Critical,
   KubeControllerManagerDown,Critical,
   KubeletDown,Critical,
   KubeSchedulerDown,Critical,

.. _K8sMasterServicesDegraded:

.. csv-table:: K8sMasterServicesDegraded
   :align: left
   :widths: 50,200

   "Severity", "Warning"
   "Summary", "The kubernetes master services are degraded"
   "Parent", "`CoreServicesDegraded`_"

.. csv-table::
   :header: "Sub Alert", "Severity", "Filter"
   :widths: 200,50,250

   KubeAPIErrorBudgetBurn,Warning,
   etcdHighNumberOfFailedGRPCRequests,Warning,
   etcdHTTPRequestsSlow,Warning,
   etcdHighCommitDurations,Warning,
   etcdHighFsyncDurations,Warning,
   etcdHighNumberOfFailedHTTPRequests,Warning,
   etcdHighNumberOfFailedProposals,Warning,
   etcdHighNumberOfLeaderChanges,Warning,
   etcdMemberCommunicationSlow,Warning,
   KubeCPUOvercommit,Warning,
   KubeCPUQuotaOvercommit,Warning,
   KubeMemoryOvercommit,Warning,
   KubeMemoryQuotaOvercommit,Warning,
   KubeClientCertificateExpiration,Warning,
   KubeClientErrors,Warning,
   KubeVersionMismatch,Warning,
   KubeDeploymentReplicasMismatch,Warning,kube-system/coredns
   KubeDeploymentReplicasMismatch,Warning,metalk8s-monitoring/prometheus-adapter
   KubeDeploymentReplicasMismatch,Warning,metalk8s-monitoring/prometheus-operator-kube-state-metrics


.. _BootstrapServicesDegraded:

.. csv-table:: BootstrapServicesDegraded
   :align: left
   :widths: 50,200

   "Severity", "Warning"
   "Summary", "The bootstrap services are degraded"
   "Parent", "`CoreServicesDegraded`_"

.. csv-table::
   :header: "Sub Alert", "Severity", "Filter"
   :widths: 200,50,250

   KubePodNotReady, Warning, kube-system/repositories-<bootstrapname>
   KubePodNotReady, Warning, kube-system/salt-master-<bootstrapname>
   KubeDeploymentReplicasMismatch, Warning, kube-system/storage-operator
   KubeDeploymentReplicasMismatch, Warning, metalk8s-ui/metalk8s-ui


Observability
*************

.. _ObservabilityServicesAtRisk:

.. csv-table:: ObservabilityServicesAtRisk
   :align: left
   :widths: 50,200

   "Severity", "Critical"
   "Summary", "The observability services are at risk"
   "Parent", "`PlatformServicesAtRisk`_"

.. csv-table::
   :header: "Sub Alert", "Severity", "Filter"
   :widths: 200,50,250

   `MonitoringServiceAtRisk`_, Critical,
   `AlertingServiceAtRisk`_, Critical,
   `LoggingServiceAtRisk`_, Critical,


.. _ObservabilityServicesDegraded:

.. csv-table:: ObservabilityServicesDegraded
   :align: left
   :widths: 50,200

   "Severity", "Warning"
   "Summary", "The observability services are degraded"
   "Parent", "`PlatformServicesDegraded`_"

.. csv-table::
   :header: "Sub Alert", "Severity", "Filter"
   :widths: 200,50,250

   `MonitoringServiceDegraded`_, Warning,
   `AlertingServiceDegraded`_, Warning,
   `DashboardingServiceDegraded`_, Warning,
   `LoggingServiceDegraded`_, Warning,

.. _MonitoringServiceAtRisk:

.. csv-table:: MonitoringServiceAtRisk
   :align: left
   :widths: 50,200

   "Severity", "Warning"
   "Summary", "The monitoring service is at Risk"
   "Parent", `ObservabilityServicesAtRisk`_

.. csv-table::
   :header: "Sub Alert", "Severity", "Filter"
   :widths: 200,50,250

   `VolumeAtRisk`_,Critical,app.kubernetes.io/name=prometheus-operator-prometheus
   PrometheusRuleFailures,Critical,
   PrometheusRemoteWriteBehind,Critical,
   PrometheusRemoteStorageFailures,Critical,
   PrometheusErrorSendingAlertsToAnyAlertmanager,Critical,
   PrometheusBadConfig,Critical,


.. _MonitoringServiceDegraded:

.. csv-table:: MonitoringServiceDegraded
   :align: left
   :widths: 50,200

   "Severity", "Warning"
   "Summary", "The monitoring service is degraded"
   "Parent", `ObservabilityServicesDegraded`_

.. csv-table::
   :header: "Sub Alert", "Severity", "Filter"
   :widths: 200,50,250

   `VolumeDegraded`_ , Warning, app.kubernetes.io/name=prometheus-operator-prometheus
   TargetDown, Warning, To be defined
   PrometheusTargetLimitHit,Warning,
   PrometheusTSDBReloadsFailing,Warning,
   PrometheusTSDBCompactionsFailing,Warning,
   PrometheusRemoteWriteDesiredShards,Warning,
   PrometheusOutOfOrderTimestamps,Warning,
   PrometheusNotificationQueueRunningFull,Warning,
   PrometheusNotIngestingSamples,Warning,
   PrometheusNotConnectedToAlertmanagers,Warning,
   PrometheusMissingRuleEvaluations,Warning,
   PrometheusErrorSendingAlertsToSomeAlertmanagers,Warning,
   PrometheusDuplicateTimestamps, Warning,
   PrometheusOperatorWatchErrors, Warning,
   PrometheusOperatorSyncFailed, Warning,
   PrometheusOperatorRejectedResources, Warning,
   PrometheusOperatorReconcileErrors, Warning,
   PrometheusOperatorNotReady, Warning,
   PrometheusOperatorNodeLookupErrors, Warning,
   PrometheusOperatorListErrors, Warning,
   KubeStatefulSetReplicasMismatch, Warning , metalk8s-monitoring/prometheus-prometheus-operator-prometheus
   KubeDeploymentReplicasMismatch, Warning, metalk8s-monitoring/prometheus-operator-operator
   KubeDaemonSetNotScheduled, Warning, metalk8s-monitoring/prometheus-operator-prometheus-node-exporter

.. _LoggingServiceAtRisk:

.. csv-table:: LoggingServiceAtRisk
   :align: left
   :widths: 50,200

   "Severity", "Critcal"
   "Summary", "The logging service is at Risk"
   "Parent", `ObservabilityServicesAtRisk`_

.. csv-table::
   :header: "Sub Alert", "Severity", "Filter"
   :widths: 200,50,250

   `VolumeAtRisk`_, Critical, app.kubernetes.io/name=loki
   AlertmanagerConfigInconsistent, Critical ,
   AlertmanagerMembersInconsistent ,Critical,
   AlertmanagerFailedReload, Critical,

.. _LoggingServiceDegraded:

.. csv-table:: LoggingServiceDegraded
   :align: left
   :widths: 50,200

   "Severity", "Warning"
   "Summary", "The logging service is degraded"
   "Parent", `ObservabilityServicesDegraded`_

.. csv-table::
   :header: "Sub Alert", "Severity", "Filter"
   :widths: 200,50,250

   `VolumeDegraded`_, Warning ,app.kubernetes.io/name=loki
   TargetDown, Warning, To be defined
   KubeStatefulSetReplicasMismatch ,Warning, metalk8s-logging/loki
   KubeDaemonSetNotScheduled, Warning,metalk8s-logging/fluentbit

.. _AlertingServiceAtRisk:

.. csv-table:: AlertingServiceAtRisk
   :align: left
   :widths: 50,200

   "Severity", "Critcal"
   "Summary", "The alerting service is at Risk"
   "Parent", `ObservabilityServicesAtRisk`_

.. csv-table::
   :header: "Sub Alert", "Severity", "Filter"
   :widths: 200,50,250

   `VolumeAtRisk`_, Critical, app.kubernetes.io/name=prometheus-operator-alertmanager
   AlertmanagerConfigInconsistent, Critical ,
   AlertmanagerMembersInconsistent ,Critical,
   AlertmanagerFailedReload, Critical,

.. _AlertingServiceDegraded:

.. csv-table:: AlertingServiceDegraded
   :align: left
   :widths: 50,200

   "Severity", "Warning"
   "Summary", "The alerting service is degraded"
   "Parent", `ObservabilityServicesDegraded`_

.. csv-table::
   :header: "Sub Alert", "Severity", "Filter"
   :widths: 200,50,250

   `VolumeDegraded`_, Warning ,app.kubernetes.io/name=prometheus-operator-alertmanager
   TargetDown, Warning, To be defined
   KubeStatefulSetReplicasMismatch ,Warning, metalk8s-monitoring/alertmanager-prometheus-operator-alertmanager
   AlertmanagerFailedReload, Warning,

.. _DashboardingServiceDegraded:

.. csv-table:: DashboardingServiceDegraded
   :align: left
   :widths: 50,200

   "Severity", "Warning"
   "Summary", "The dashboarding service is degraded"
   "Parent", `ObservabilityServicesDegraded`_

.. csv-table::
   :header: "Sub Alert", "Severity", "Filter"
   :align: left
   :widths: 200,50,250

   "KubeStatefulSetReplicasMismatch", "Warning", "metalk8s-monitoring/prometheus-operator-grafana"
   "TargetDown", "Warning", "To be defined"


Network
*******

.. _ControlPlaneNetworkDegraded:

.. csv-table:: ControlPlaneNetworkDegraded
   :align: left
   :widths: 50,200

   "Severity", "Warning"
   "Summary", "The Control Plane Network is degraded"
   "Parent", `PlatformDegraded`_

.. csv-table::
   :header: "Sub Alert", "Severity", "Filter"
   :align: left
   :widths: 200,50,250

   "NodeNetworkReceiveErrs", "Warning", "Need to filter on the proper cp interface"
   "NodeHighNumberConntrackEntriesUsed", "Warning", "Need to filter on the proper cp interface"
   "NodeNetworkTransmitErrs", "Warning", "Need to filter on the proper cp interface"
   "NodeNetworkInterfaceFlapping", "Warning", "Need to filter on the proper cp interface"


.. _WorkloadPlaneNetworkDegraded:

.. csv-table:: WorkloadPlaneNetworkDegraded
   :align: left
   :widths: 50,200

   "Severity", "Warning"
   "Summary", "The Workload Plane Network is degraded"
   "Parent", `PlatformDegraded`_

.. csv-table::
   :header: "Sub Alert", "Severity", "Filter"
   :align: left
   :widths: 200,50,250

   "NodeNetworkReceiveErrs", "Warning", "Need to filter on the proper wp interface"
   "NodeHighNumberConntrackEntriesUsed", "Warning", "Need to filter on the proper wp interface"
   "NodeNetworkTransmitErrs", "Warning", "Need to filter on the proper wp interface"
   "NodeNetworkInterfaceFlapping", "Warning", "Need to filter on the proper wp interface"

* Virtual Plane (TBC), kube-proxy, calico-kube-controllers, calico-node.

We may want to introduce this entity in MetalK8s UI and as a High Level Alert

Access
******

.. _AccessServicesDegraded:

.. csv-table:: AccessServicesDegraded
   :align: left
   :widths: 50,200

   "Severity", "Warning"
   "Summary", "The Access services are degraded"
   "Parent", `PlatformServicesDegraded`_

.. csv-table::
   :header: "Sub Alert", "Severity", "Filter"
   :align: left
   :widths: 200,50,250

   "`IngressControllerDegraded`_", "Warning",
   "`AuthenticationDegraded`_", "Warning",

.. _IngressControllerDegraded:

.. csv-table:: IngressControllerDegraded
   :align: left
   :widths: 50,200

   "Severity", "Warning"
   "Summary", "The Ingress Controllers for CP and WP are degraded"
   "Parent", `AccessServicesDegraded`_

.. csv-table::
   :header: "Sub Alert", "Severity", "Filter"
   :align: left
   :widths: 200,50,250

   "KubeDeploymentReplicasMismatch", "Warning", "metalk8s-ingress/ingress-nginx-defaultbackend"
   "KubeDaemonSetNotScheduled", "Warning", "metalk8s-system/ingress-nginx-controller"
   "KubeDaemonSetNotScheduled", "Warning", "metalk8s-system/ingress-nginx-control-plane-controller"

.. _AuthenticationDegraded:

.. csv-table:: AuthenticationDegraded
   :align: left
   :widths: 50,200

   "Severity", "Warning"
   "Summary", "The Authentication service for K8S API is degraded"
   "Parent", `AccessServicesDegraded`_

.. csv-table::
   :header: "Sub Alert", "Severity", "Filter"
   :align: left
   :widths: 200,50,250

   "KubeDeploymentReplicasMismatch", "Warning", "metalk8s-auth/dex"
